(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
We're gonna start out
with the insertion sort implementation
that we went through in the insertion sort video,
so that's exactly what I have here,
this is the starter project from the last video.
And this is an iterative implementation,
we're not using recursion,
there's no method in here that's calling itself.
Now of course recursion is a method
that calls itself,
so we're going to want to move some of the code
into a method and essentially we need to think
about what's happening on each iteration
of this outer loop,
what's happening is on each iteration,
we're expanding the sorted partition by one
because if you remember in the beginning,
we're assuming that the very first element in the array
is sorted and then we pick off the first element
in the unsorted partition
and we insert it into the sorted partition
and that way we expand the sorted partition by one
and then we pick off the next element
in the unsorted partition et cetera
until they're all sorted.
It would be nice to have a method
that we can call with the number of items
that we want to sort
because if we start out with the first two items
and we sort them and then we sort the three items
and then four items and then five items
and then six items and then seven items,
we'll have ended up sorting the entire array.
So, we're gonna move our code
into a method that accepts an array
and the number of items we wanna sort.
So, we'll say public static void insertionSort
and it's gonna receive an int array, the input array
and an int of the number of items
we wanna sort and we always assume
that we're starting at the front of the array.
So, in our method, our recursive method,
we're gonna need a breaking condition.
We wanna know when to stop the recursion
and the braking condition we're going to use
is if numItems is less than two.
And if it is, we're going to return
because when we have one item,
by definition, that one item is sorted
and so, when we get down to calling this insertionSort
with one item, that will break the recursion
and then what do we want to do in here?
We want to do an insertionSort
with the same input array but with one less items.
So, when we're called with two items or more,
which means that we have work to do,
before we sort the items we're called with,
we're gonna sort numItems minus one.
So, if we're called in the beginning to sort seven items,
we'll say we'll first sort the first six items
and then after we've sorted the first six items,
we'll sort that final item
and so, we'll say essentially what we did up here
and so, I'm gonna copy this code,
we're gonna have to change it a bit
and I'm gonna paste it down here,
let me change all of the occurrences of intArray to input.
Input and input,
input and let's put input here
and instead of a firstUnsortedIndex,
we're gonna use numItems minus one.
So, we'll put numItems minus one here
and we're gonna put numItems minus one here.
And that's it, that's all we have to do.
So, what's going on here?
When we call the method with the entire array,
we're gonna have seven items,
so we're gonna check whether we have more than one item
and we do, and so what we're gonna say
is let's first sort the first six items
and so, by the time we return from this method,
the first six items in the array have been sorted
and we wanna just sort now the seventh item,
the very last item.
So, we started out with the entire thing.
By the time we get here,
we sorted the first six elements,
so everybody's sorted at this point except minus 22.
And what we're gonna do
is just a regular insertionSort
but instead of a loop, we're just doing one iteration
and that'll be for the element
that's at numItems minus one.
So, for the entire array,
that would be input six which is minus 22
and then we're gonna say for i equals six,
i is greater than zero
and input i minus one is greater than newElement,
so we're looking for the insertion point here,
i--, as long as the element is greater than newElement,
we're gonna keep looking for the insertion point
because we wanna find the first element
that's less than or equal to the one we wanna insert
because when we find that element,
we'll know we found the insertion point
and so, as we're looking for this element,
of course we're shifting elements up
because we have to make room for the insertion
and when we drop out of this loop,
i will be the insertion point of the newElement.
So, instead of using a loop
to increase the sorted partition from left to right,
we're using recursion
to increase the sorted partition from left to right.
And I'll show you that in a minute
when I add some print lien statements
so we can see what's going on.
So, what I'm gonna do is I'm going to comment out
this sort obviously
but I'm gonna leave it there so you can see it.
And let's do the very first call to insertionSort.
So, that'll be insertionSort
and it'll be our intArray
and when we call the method,
we wanna sort the entire array
and so, what's gonna happen is we're gonna come in here,
numItems will be seven
because that's intArray.length,
this condition will fail
and we're gonna say then let's call insertionSort
to sort the first six items in the array
and then that'll come in and it'll say
let's call insertionSort to sort the first five items
in the array.
And then the first four items, three items,
two items et cetera
until we come in with just one item
and then the recursive stack will start to unravel.
The recursive call that called insertionSort
with one item will be able to continue executing
and it will, as you can see,
there's no loop in here
and so, each recursive call handles one element
and so, each recursive call
grows the sorted partition by one,
it's exactly what we were doing here in this outer loop
except we've essentially replaced this for loop
with recursion, so let's run
just to see if this works.
I'm gonna rebuild the project.
That sometimes happens,
so I'm gonna say rebuild the project.
And now let's try running.
And we get minus 22, minus 15,
one, seven, 20, 35 and 55,
so our recursive sort is working.
Let's add a few print line statements
so we can understand better what's going on.
I'm gonna add some actually to the end here
or after we've finished a call to insertionSort,
just before we exit, I'll say system.out.print line
result of call when numItems
equals and we'll print the numItems
and then we'll say for i equals zero,
i less than intArray.length, i++,
that should be input actually
'cause we're inside the method.
System.out.print line input i,
let's print everything on one line
and then we'll say System.out.print
and we'll put a comma there,
so we'll print the array out on one line.
And then I'll just do a System.out.print line
so that we get a new line there
and I'm gonna also print out a divider
so that we can kind of see what's happening
on each iteration.
So, let's run again.
So, let me pull this up a bit
so we can see what's going on.
So, when the number of items is two,
let me scroll up here,
so this is our original array
and we start out by saying that 20 is sorted.
That's the way that the insertionSort works,
so 20 is sorted and we wanna pick off the first element
in the unsorted partition
and insert it into its proper place in the sorted partition.
So, when the number of items equals two,
the result of our sort is 20 and 35.
It looks like we haven't done anything but we have,
it's just that 35 happens to be greater than 20.
When the number of items is three,
you'll notice that we've picked off minus 15
and we've put it into its correct sorted position
and this is exactly what we were doing
in the iterative insertionSort
except we were doing this as part of a for loop
but now each of these is a call
to the insertionSort method,
so as I said before, instead of using a for loop,
we're replacing that with recursive calls.
When the number of items is four,
we wanna add seven into the sorted partition
and we did, so now seven is in its correct spot.
When the number of items is five,
55 has been added in,
when the number of items is six,
we've added in one
and then finally, when the number of items is seven,
we add in minus 22 and we're finished
and you'll notice that the recursive calls complete
in the reverse order that they were called.
I'll just pull this down now
because we called insertionSort with seven
but the first call to return
is the one with two items.
We don't see a print out for numItems equals one
because we just return so we never make it down
to the print statements.
So, when num is one, we just kick out
and when that happens,
we would return to the recursive call
with numItems equals to two.
And so, it would continue executing from here
and when the number of items is two,
it wants to make sure that the first two elements
in the array are sorted, so it's gonna handle 35
and then when the number of items is three,
it wants to make sure that the first three items
are sorted and so that's when it handles minus 15.
This is what a recursive insertionSort looks like.
As I said, instead of using a loop to grow
the sorted partition, we're using recursion
to grow the sorted partition.
In the iterative solution,
each iteration of the loop grows the sorted partition
by one and in the insertionSort,
each call to the method grows the sorted partition by one.
So, hopefully these print statements have helped you
to see what's going on.
Remember that we needed a breaking condition
otherwise this recursion would never finish
but otherwise the code's very, very similar
apart from making the recursive call,
this here was a copy, paste job.
We just needed to change it
to use the number of items minus one.
And of course we changed intArray to input.
But this code here is doing exactly
what this code here is doing
and so, for the recursion,
we just needed to replace the loop.
So, that's it for challenge number two.
I'll see you in challenge number three.